---
title: "TIL: zeus's law (xenia)"
date: 2026-07-19
categories: til
---

zeus's law (xenia) as mentioned frequently in the film odyssey is the concept of treating strangers kindly and with hospitality since strangers could be gods in disguise. the concept is similar to athithidevo bhava.

it promotes kindness amongst hosts and strangers and vice versa. but the way its framed makes you realise its selfish. its selfish because one doesn't know with certainity whether the stranger is a god or no.

we can model kindness mathematically. assuming people are selfish, and kindness requires effort, a person should be kind only when the expected utility from reciprocity of kindness exceeds the effort required for kindness.

this is why people behave so nicely with CXOs, politicians and other people with power or wealth. because the probability of reciprocal gifts is higher (or the costs of not being kind) than the effort of kindness.

which is why seeing how people behave with blue-collar workers they are most likely never going to meet again in life is a great proxy. but points of distinctions here. behaving nicely doesn't really cost much. acts of kindness generally do. 

so behaving wrongly with blue-collar workers is usually indicative of the brain either being under chronic stress or the brain never having learnt empathy and theory of mind. im no neuroscientist. 

but the reason kind people behave kindly even when there's no one around or that there's nothing to have in return is because the costs of internal morality and guilt. they have high internal moral values and they will be subjecting themselves to guilt if they do not act kindly.
